# Reified Interpreters

The interpreter strategy is perhaps the most important in all of functional programming. In this chapter we'll learn how to implement interpreters using algebraic data types. The central idea is to **separate description from action**. 
When we use the interpreter strategy our program consists of two parts: the description, instructions, or program that describes what we want to do, and the interpreter that carries the actions in the description. 

Interpreters are so important because they are the key to enabling compositionality and reasoning, particularly while allowing effects. For example, imagine implementing a graphics library using the interpreter strategy. A program simply describes what we want to draw on the screen, but critically it does not draw anything. The interpreter takes this description and creates the drawing described by it. We can freely compose descriptions only because they do not carry out any effects. For example, if we have a description that describes a circle, and one for a square, we can compose them by saying we should draw the circle next to the square thereby creating a new description. If we immediately drew pictures there would be nothing to compose with. Similarly, it's easier to reason about pictures in this system because a program describes exactly what will appear on the screen, and there is no state from prior drawing that we need to worry about.

Throughout this chapter we will explore the interpreter strategy by building a series of interpreters for regular expressions. We've chosen to use regular expressions because they are already familiar to many and they are simple to work with. This means we can focus on the details of the interpreter strategy without getting caught up in problem specific details, but we still end up with a realistic and useful result.

We'll start with a basic implementation strategy that uses algebraic data types and structural recursion. We'll then look at variations that allow us to avoid stack overflows and to improve performance.
